So let's move on to another example
of multi variable regression.
A very important example that underlies
the topic of so called ANCOVA.
I'd like to through an example to
illustrate fitting multiple lines with
different intercepts and different slopes.
So I'm going to use the swiss dataset
that we've looked at previously.
And recall we're trying
to model fertilities and
outcome as a linear function
of agriculture, which is
the percent of that province that was
working in agriculture as the predictor.
Remember that examination and
education really including those modified
the effect of agriculture and fertility.
For the time being, let's ignore that, and
I just want to show you how to fit
different lines, one for each group.
So let's take the Catholic variable.
So if I were, for example,
to do hist(swiss$Catholic),
notice that it's very bimodal.
And that's because most provinces
are either majority Catholic or
majority Protestant,
from this time period.
So now I'm going to create using dplyr,
a catholic,
binary catholic variable, which is one
if the province is majority catholic,
and zero if it's majority
protestant.
CatholicBin variable, and
then now let me plot the data.
And what you see now is these
two variables, the CatholicBin
factor variable, that's zero for majority
Protestant and one for majority Catholic.
And you can see the data there, there
are some potential issues with the data.
And what I'm going to be describing
which is to fit lines to the data.
Particularly these outlyingish
looking observations.
But I'm going to ignore this now,
because later on in another lecture,
we are going to be talking about
outliers and influence points.
And then also, there's the impact
of these other variables,
how they would relate to these model fits.
So let's ignore all that for
the time being, and
simply work on fitting a line where
here now we want two separate lines.
One for the majority
Catholic provinces, and one for
the majority Protestant provinces.
Okay, so let's see if we can do that.
Let me describe some
models that we could fit.
So here I have given some notation.
Y is fertility, X1 is the percent of
the province working in agriculture,
and X2 is a binary variable, where it's
one if the province is over 50% catholic,
and zero if the province is
over Is majority Protestant.
So consider model one, where we modeled
that our expected y, given x1 and x2,
is an intercept plus a slope times x1.
So that would just be a line,
and it would disregard
the religion of the province entirely.
Let's consider a second model.
Here we have expected of y given x1 and
x2 is
beta not plus beta 1 x1 plus beta 2 x2.
Now Let's think about this.
In the event that X two is equal to zero,
if the province is majority protestant.
Then this works out to be beta
knot plus beta one X one.
In the event that X two is equal to one.
In the event that the province is
majority Catholic, this works out to be
beta not plus beta2,
because this term right here is now one,
plus beta1 X1.
So fitting this model,
the model that includes X1 and X2, but
no interaction Fits two models
that have the same slope.
These two models have the same slope,
but they have different intercepts,
beta not and then beta one plus
beta two for the second intercept.
Okay, let's consider one third model.
I want now my expected outcome,
given my predictors to be beta not,
plus beta 1 X1, plus beta 2 X2,
plus beta 3 X1 times X2.
Now, lets look at what
happens when X2 is zero,
this works out to be Beta0
the Beta1 is still there,
Beta1X1 is still there
Beta2X2 this term go to zero.
And beta 3 X1 times X2 is also zero,
because X2 is zero in both those cases.
Okay?
Now let's work on the case when X2 is 1,
which is the case when
the province is majority Catholic.
So we get beta not, plus beta 1 X1,
plus now beta 2 is this term is present,
because X2 is 1, and
this term is now beta 3 times X1,
because remember X2 is equal to one
in this case that we're considering.
Okay, now let's reorganize terms,
and that' s beta not plus beta two,
there plus beta one plus beta three X one.
Okay, so what we've seen is if
we include in interaction term,
then we fit two lines, but
now those two lines have different slopes.
If we omitted that interaction term, we
fit two lines but they had the same slope.
If we include the interaction term,
two lines different slopes and
different intercepts.
And the coefficient in front of
the Catholic term by itself,
Is going to be the change in the intercept
going from Protestant to Catholic, right?
Here is the intercept for Protestant and
here is the intercept for Catholic.
And the beta three term,
the term in front of the interaction,
is going to be the change from the slope
going from Protestant to Catholic, right?
So the slope for the, When X2 equals one,
is beta one plus beta three.
It's going to have that
extra term in there.
Okay, so let's try it with some code and
I hope it will make sense.
And I think it's a little bit easier
to see when you actually do the code.